
Dwarf planet Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, and it's the only dwarf planet located in the inner solar system. It was the first member of the asteroid belt to be discovered when Giuseppe Piazzi spotted it in 1801. And when NASA's Dawn arrived in 2015, Ceres became the first dwarf planet to receive a visit from a spacecraft.
Called an asteroid for many years, Ceres is so much bigger and so different from its rocky neighbors that scientists classified it as a dwarf planet in 2006. Even though Ceres comprises 25% of the asteroid belt's total mass, Pluto is still 14 times more massive.
Ceres is named for the Roman goddess of corn and harvests. The word cereal comes from the same name.

Ceres’ radius is just 296 miles (476 km). If Earth were the size of a nickel, Ceres would be about as big as a poppy seed.
Ceres takes 1,682 Earth days, or 4.6 Earth years, to make one trip around the Sun.
Ceres completes one rotation around its axis every 9 hours.
Ceres is so much bigger and so different from its neighbors that scientists classified it as a dwarf planet in 2006.
There’s no evidence of an atmosphere on Ceres, only sporadic water vapor—possibly from ice ejected by small impacts.
Ceres does not have any moons.
Ceres does not have any rings.
Dawn reached it in 2015 to study its surface, composition and history.
Scientists would like to search for possible signs of life on Ceres. It has something many other planets don't: water.
Ceres is named for the Roman goddess of grain crops and harvests. The word cereal comes from the same name.

The largest body in the asteroid belt, Ceres has amassed a number of references in science fiction stories of the 20th and 21st centuries. In the TV series "The Expanse," Ceres is inhabited by humans, and in the PC Game Descent, one of the secret levels takes place on Ceres.
In the video game Destiny, Ceres was colonized by an alien race called the Fallen at the end of humanity's Golden Age. Ceres was later destroyed by a civilization of post-humans who inhabit the asteroid belt.

Dawn Mission Homepage
NASA Planetary Photojournal - Ceres

Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: 
Dr. Lori Glaze

NASA Official: 
Kristen Erickson

Science Writer & Site Manager: 
Amanda Barnett

Social Media Lead: 
Bill Dunford


